G1-G9 filing ASP/GSP solution
Elevate processes with AI automation and vendor delight
Streamline vendor management and collaboration in one unified portal
Optimise ITC for profitability
Bulk invoicing within any ERP
e-TDS return filing solution
Maximise EBITDA with early vendor payments
Instant working capital financing
Automated secretarial compliance
Connected finance ecosystem for process automation, greater control, higher savings and productivity
GST and direct tax compliance
Complete supply chain solution for ultimate control, effortless collaboration, and assured compliance
File your taxes in 3 minutes
ITR filed by India's top tax experts
G1-G9 filing ASP/GSP solution
Elevate processes with AI automation and vendor delight
Streamline vendor management and collaboration in one unified portal
Optimise ITC for profitability
Bulk invoicing within any ERP
e-TDS return filing solution
Maximise EBITDA with early vendor payments
Instant working capital financing
Automated secretarial compliance
Connected finance ecosystem for process automation, greater control, higher savings and productivity
GST and direct tax compliance
Complete supply chain solution for ultimate control, effortless collaboration, and assured compliance
File your taxes in 3 minutes
ITR filed by India's top tax experts
File your ITR in Minuteswith 100% Accuracy
Home
>
Income Tax
>
Salary Income
>
What is House Rent Allowance (HRA) - Exemption, Calculation & New Rules 2026
What is House Rent Allowance (HRA) - Exemption, Calculation & New Rules 2026
|
House Rent Allowance (HRA) is a component of an employee's salary paid by employers to cover rental accommodation costs. Under Section 10(13A) of theIncome Tax Act, a portion of HRA is exempt from tax if the employee is salaried, lives in rented accommodation, and filesIncome Tax Return (ITR)under the old tax regime. HRA cannot be claimed under thenew tax regime.
What is HRA?
HRA stands for House Rent Allowance. It is a salary component provided by employers to help employees meet rental housing expenses. Under Section 10(13A), a salaried employee living in rented accommodation can claim HRA as a partial tax exemption under the old income tax regime.
House Rent Allowance is an integral part of your salary structure, provided to cover the cost of accomodation. This is especially provided in big cities, where the rental expense is usually high. Though HRA cannot be claimed if you do not live in rental premises, you can claim HRA and home loan together, on satisfaction of certain conditions.
HRA Eligibility: Who Can Claim HRA Exemption?
The following table shows the persons eligible for claiming HRA:
How is HRA Exemption Calculated?
HRA exemption amount is the lowest of the following:
Actual HRA received from employer, or
50% of basic salary (For metro cities) or 40% of basic salary (other cities), or
Rent paid minus 10% of basic salary
In simple terms, the amount that can be claimed u/s 10(13A) as HRA exemption is least of the following:
Note:
Salary here means Basic + Dearness Allowance + Commission as a percentage of turnover.
Metro Cities include Delhi, Chennai, Mumbai, Kolkata, Bengaluru, Pune, Hyderabad, and Ahmedabad.
HRA Exemption Under New Tax Rules 2026
TheNew Income Tax Rules, 2026makes it mandatory to disclose the relationship between the landlord and tenant for claiming HRA benefit and the 50% HRA exemption has been extended to included four more cities i.e., Hyderabad, Pune, Ahmedabad and Bengaluru. Thus, a total of 8 cities are now eligible for 50% HRA exemption:
Delhi,
Mumbai,
Chennai,
Kolkata,
Bengaluru,
Pune,
Hyderabad, and
Ahmedabad.
Though the Income Tax Act 2025 takes effect from 01st April 2026, the provisions of the 1961 act applies for AY 2026-27, as it pertains to income earned up to 31st March 2026.
Below is a comparison of section from the Income Tax Act with those in Income Tax Act 2026.
HRA Exemption Calculation
Mr. Anwar, employed in a company, has taken up an accommodation on rent for which he pays Rs. 18,000 per month during the FY 2025-26. He receives a basic salary of Rs. 27,000 monthly. He also gets an HRA of Rs. 1.62 lakh from his employer during the year.
Situation -1: Mr. Anwar living in Delhi
HRA exemption would be the lowest of the following:
In this case, the entire HRA receivedRs. 1.62 lakhsis eligible for exemption, as it is the least figure. This is only if Mr. Anwar opts for the Old Tax Regime.
Situation -2: Mr. Anwar living in a Tier 2 City (not metro cities)
HRA exemption would be the lowest of the following:
In this case,Rs. 1,29,600is eligible for exemption, and the remaining amount Rs. 32,400 is taxable under the applicable income tax slabs.
Situation - 3: Mr. Anwar opted for the New Tax Regime
This exemption will not to available to Mr. Anwar under the New Tax Regime implying that the entire HRA of Rs. 1 lakhs will be taxed at applicable slab rates.
HRA Exemption Calculator
Confused with all the math? Use ClearTax'sHRA calculatorand know how much you can save.
House Rent Allowance - Old vs New Tax Regime
House rent allowance is a tax deduction option available exclusively under the old tax regime. Therefore, persons opting for the new tax regime are not eligible for HRA.
The new tax regime offers relaxed slab rates with limited deductions, while the old regime offers a variety of deductions with less beneficial slab rates.
Therefore, it is recommended to opt for old regime if there is a significant rent outflow and resultant HRA exemption, along with other tax saving deductions.
If there is limited HRA exemption available due to less rent outflow, along with less tax saving deductions, the new regime are often beneficial.
Documents Required to Claim HRA Exemption
There is no necessity to submit all the supporting documents along with the income tax return.
But for submission of proofs to the employer, and to respond to the department in case of any notices, the following documentation is recommended.
The following are the important documents required to claim HRA.Rent ReceiptsRental AgreementForm 12BBBank payment proof for rentSalary slip where HRA is incorporatedPAN of landlord - if the rent exceeds Rs.1 Lakh per annum. Else, you may lose out on the HRA exemption.
Rent Receipts
Rental Agreement
Form 12BB
Bank payment proof for rent
Salary slip where HRA is incorporated
PAN of landlord - if the rent exceeds Rs.1 Lakh per annum. Else, you may lose out on the HRA exemption.
Landlords without a PAN must sign a self declaration stating he does not have a PAN, as per circular No. 8/2013 dated 10 October 2013.
How to Claim HRA Exemption?
To be able to claim an exemption for the HRA component, it is important for you tofile your ITRwithin the specifieddue date. The exemption should be clearly shown in the ITR form. Make sure to provide proof to HR to reduce monthlyTDS.
Special Cases Where HRA Exemption Can be Claimed
1. Paying rent to Parents
You can claim an HRA exemption if you arepaying rent to your parents. However, it is important to make sure that it is disclosed as rental income in your parent's ITR.
2. Home Loan Interest Deduction and HRA Exemption
If you own a house in one city but pay rent in another city due to any reasons, you can claim both HRA and home loan interest deductions in your ITR
House Rent Deduction for Self-Employed Taxpayers
Section 80GGof the Income Tax Act allows taxpayers without HRA component but paying rent to claim a deduction against the rental expense incurred. However, the deduction is limited to specified threshold.
However, a maximum deduction of Rs. 60,000 can be claimed in a year under Section 80GG under the old tax regime only. Section 80GG deduction is not available under the new tax regime.
Eligibility under Section 80GG
Self employed individuals, and employees who do not receive HRA as a part of their CTC are eligible for deduction under section 80GG. Taxpayers opting for the new regime are not eligible for section 80GG deduction.
Section 80GG Formula
The lowest of these will be considered as the deduction.
Rs.5,000 per month or 60,000 per year
25% of the total income before allowing deduction under this section
Actual rent less 10% of income before allowing deduction under this section.
Frequently Asked Questions
When you live in own premises, when you are not a salaried employee, and when you file ITR under the new regime, HRA is fully taxable.
A self-employed individual cannot claim an HRA exemption. However, deduction can be claimed undersection 80GG.
No, Individuals paying rent but not receiving house rent allowance can claim a deduction under Section 80GG.
Yes. If you can justify that you have lived in different accommodation and paid rent for the same, you can claim HRA and home loan deduction together.
Yes. While you are living with parents, you can claim HRA by following these points.
Pay rent to them via bank transfer
Draft a rental agreement
Document all the rental receipts for the year.
No. House rent allowance is not available under the new tax regime.
Delhi, Mumbai, Kolkata, Chennai, Bangalore, Ahmedabad, Pune and Hyderbad qualify for 50% HRA rules as per the Income Tax Rules, 2026.
Section 80GG allows the self employed taxpayers to claim deduction on the rent. Employees who do not receive salary income can also claim deduction under section 80GG.
Clear offers taxation & financial solutions to individuals, businesses, organizations & chartered accountants in India. Clear serves 1.5+ Million happy customers, 20000+ CAs & tax experts & 10000+ businesses across India.
Efiling Income Tax Returns(ITR) is made easy with Clear platform. Just upload your form 16, claim your deductions and get your acknowledgment number online. You can efile income tax return on your income from salary, house property, capital gains, business & profession and income from other sources. Further you can also file TDS returns, generate Form-16, use our Tax Calculator software, claim HRA, check refund status and generate rent receipts for Income Tax Filing.
CAs, experts and businesses can get GST ready with Clear GST software & certification course. Our GST Software helps CAs, tax experts & business to manage returns & invoices in an easy manner. Our Goods & Services Tax course includes tutorial videos, guides and expert assistance to help you in mastering Goods and Services Tax. Clear can also help you in getting your business registered for Goods & Services Tax Law.
Save taxes with Clear by investing in tax saving mutual funds (ELSS) online. Our experts suggest the best funds and you can get high returns by investing directly or through SIP. Download Black by ClearTax App to file returns from your mobile phone.
Office Address - Defmacro Software Private Limited, C 245A, Ground floor, Room No 1, Vikas Puri, West Delhi, New Delhi, Delhi 110018, India
Cleartax is a product by Defmacro Software Pvt. Ltd.
Privacy PolicyTerms of use
ISO 27001
Data Center
SSL Certified Site
128-bit encryption