G1-G9 filing ASP/GSP solution
Elevate processes with AI automation and vendor delight
Streamline vendor management and collaboration in one unified portal
Optimise ITC for profitability
Bulk invoicing within any ERP
e-TDS return filing solution
Maximise EBITDA with early vendor payments
Instant working capital financing
Automated secretarial compliance
Connected finance ecosystem for process automation, greater control, higher savings and productivity
GST and direct tax compliance
Complete supply chain solution for ultimate control, effortless collaboration, and assured compliance
File your taxes in 3 minutes
ITR filed by India's top tax experts
G1-G9 filing ASP/GSP solution
Elevate processes with AI automation and vendor delight
Streamline vendor management and collaboration in one unified portal
Optimise ITC for profitability
Bulk invoicing within any ERP
e-TDS return filing solution
Maximise EBITDA with early vendor payments
Instant working capital financing
Automated secretarial compliance
Connected finance ecosystem for process automation, greater control, higher savings and productivity
GST and direct tax compliance
Complete supply chain solution for ultimate control, effortless collaboration, and assured compliance
File your taxes in 3 minutes
ITR filed by India's top tax experts
File your ITR in Minuteswith 100% Accuracy
Home
>
Income Tax
>
80C-80-Deductions
>
Section 80D of Income Tax Act: Deductions Under Medical Insurance, Limit, Eligibility And Policies
Section 80D of Income Tax Act: Deductions Under Medical Insurance, Limit, Eligibility And Policies
|
Section 80D allows taxpayers to claim a deduction on health insurance premiums paid for themselves and their family members. Under Section 80D of theIncome Tax Act, individuals andHindu Undivided Families(HUFs) can claim deductions of up to Rs. 25,000 for insurance covering self, spouse, and children, and up to Rs. 50,000 for senior citizens. An additional deduction of up to Rs. 5,000 is available for preventive health check-ups within the overall limit.
However, deductions under Section 80D are available only under the old tax regime. Taxpayers opting for thenew regimecannot claim this deduction.
Though the Income Tax Act 2025 takes effect from 01st April 2026, the provisions of the 1961 act applies for AY 2026-27, as it pertains to income earned up to 31st March,2026.
What is Section 80D?
Section 80D provides a tax deduction on health insurance premiums and certain medical expenses paid during a financial year.Individuals or HUFs can claim a deduction under this section. Taxpayer can claim deduction on health insurance premium paid for
Self
Spouse
Dependent children
Parents
You can also claim a deduction for preventive health check-ups and top-up health plans, subject to specified limits.
Section 80D Deduction Limits
The deduction under Section 80D is separate from and over the Rs. 1.5 lakh deduction available underSection 80Cof the Income Tax Act.
Preventive health checkups of up to ₹5,000 are included within these limits. And under this section, family includes only the spouse and dependent children.
Expenses eligible for Deduction under Section 80D
1.Health insurance premiums
Premium paid on health insurance, can be claimed as far as it is paid in any mode other than cash.
The amount should be actually paid within the end of the financial year. Amount due for the financial but still unpaid cannot be claimed as a deduction.
2. Medical expenses
For senior citizens who do not have any health insurance, deduction can be claimed on actual expenses paid within the ceiling limit.
Expenses not covered under the insurance, for whatever reasons, cannot be claimed as a deduction, since it is paid while an insurance premium is also paid.
3. Preventive health check-up
Preventive health check-up is eligible for 80D deduction in order to encourage Tax payer to be more health aware.
Up to Rs. 5,000 can be claimed as a deduction andThe payment for preventive health check-upscan be made in cash.
Mode of Payment Under Section 80D
For claiming such deduction under section 80D, the payment has to be made in the specified mode:
Example of Section 80D Deduction
Rahul has paid a health insurance premium of Rs 23,000 for the health insurance of his wife and dependent children in the financial year 2025-26. He also had a health check-up done for himself and has paid Rs 5,000. For his father, he pays a health insurance amount of Rs 35,000.
Answer:
Rahul can claim a deduction of Rs 75,000 under Section 80D of the Income Tax Act.
Rs 23,000 has been allowed towards the insurance premium paid, and Rs 2,000 has been allowed for a health check-up. The deduction towards preventive health check-ups has been restricted to Rs 2,000 as the overall deduction cannot exceed Rs 25,000 in this case. For his parents health insurance he can claim the entire Rs 35,000 as it is within the ceiling limit of Rs 50,000.
Below is a summary image explaining the provisions under section 80D.
Is Section 80D allowed under the new tax regime?
No. Deductions under Section 80D of the Income Tax Act are available only under the old tax regime. Taxpayers who opt for the new tax regime cannot claim deductions for health insurance premiums or preventive health check-ups under this section.
Multi-year Health Insurance Premium Paid in Lump-sum
Sometimes, people buy multi-year health insurance plans because of the discounts offered.
For this they pay the premium amount upfront for all the years.
In this case, deduction is allowed proportionately under section 80D.
However, this would again be subject to the limits of Rs 25,000 of Rs 50,000 as discussed above.
Example:Mr. A bought 2-year health insurance policy and paid Rs 30,000 upfront. In this case, Mr. A can claim Rs 15,000 as deduction under Section 80D in each of the two years.
Points to Remember while Purchasing Medical Insurance for Claiming 80D Deductions
A medical insurance premium paid for a brother, sister, grandparents, aunts, uncles or any other relative cannot be claimed as a deduction for taking tax benefits.
Premium paid on behalf of working children cannot be taken for tax benefit.
In the case of part payment by you and a parent, both of you can claim a deduction to the extent paid by each.
The deduction must be taken without showing the service tax and cess portion from the premium amount.
Group health insurance premium provided by the company is not eligible for deduction.
Premium paid by any mode other than cash is allowed for deduction. Hence premium paid by credit card or other online mode is also allowed for deduction.
Final Word
Section 80D is an attractive deduction, which allows the taxpayers to claim deduction on a very essential and crucial expense ,medical insurance premium. This does not require deliberate investments planning and altering your financial goals, thus making it a very popular deduction among the taxpayers.
Frequently Asked Questions
As per section 80D, a taxpayer can claim a tax deduction on premiums paid towards medical insurance for self, spouse, parents, and dependent children. Individuals and HUF can claim this deduction. This also covers the medical expenditure incurred by senior citizens.
Only individuals and HUFs can claim deduction under Section 80D. Deduction for self, spouse, dependent parents, children are allowed. However, the higher limit of deduction is available to resident senior citizens and not available for non-resident senior citizens.
Salaried:You may submit the health check-up invoice to your employer at the time of investment declaration.
Self-employed:The income tax department does not require submitting any document/receipt for claiming the deduction while filing ITR.
Health Insurance premium paid in cash
Payment made on behalf of working children, siblings, grandparents or any other relative
Group health insurance premium made by a company on behalf of an employee
No, an individual or HUF cannot claim a deduction under sec 80D for payment of insurance premium if you choose to pay tax under the new tax regime as the deduction is available only under the old tax regime.
No, it cannot be claimed as a deduction as it will be an expense to the employer if reimbursed by the employer.
Yes, an individual or HUF can claim deduction under section 80D even if medical treatment is received from outside the country. There is no such restriction mentioned in the law.
In most cases you can claim Rs 50,000 for parents and Rs 25,000 for self as deduction. However, if you and your parents are senior citizens then you can claim upto Rs 50,000 for self and Rs.50,000 for parents.
Clear offers taxation & financial solutions to individuals, businesses, organizations & chartered accountants in India. Clear serves 1.5+ Million happy customers, 20000+ CAs & tax experts & 10000+ businesses across India.
Efiling Income Tax Returns(ITR) is made easy with Clear platform. Just upload your form 16, claim your deductions and get your acknowledgment number online. You can efile income tax return on your income from salary, house property, capital gains, business & profession and income from other sources. Further you can also file TDS returns, generate Form-16, use our Tax Calculator software, claim HRA, check refund status and generate rent receipts for Income Tax Filing.
CAs, experts and businesses can get GST ready with Clear GST software & certification course. Our GST Software helps CAs, tax experts & business to manage returns & invoices in an easy manner. Our Goods & Services Tax course includes tutorial videos, guides and expert assistance to help you in mastering Goods and Services Tax. Clear can also help you in getting your business registered for Goods & Services Tax Law.
Save taxes with Clear by investing in tax saving mutual funds (ELSS) online. Our experts suggest the best funds and you can get high returns by investing directly or through SIP. Download Black by ClearTax App to file returns from your mobile phone.
Office Address - Defmacro Software Private Limited, C 245A, Ground floor, Room No 1, Vikas Puri, West Delhi, New Delhi, Delhi 110018, India
Cleartax is a product by Defmacro Software Pvt. Ltd.
Privacy PolicyTerms of use
ISO 27001
Data Center
SSL Certified Site
128-bit encryption