G1-G9 filing ASP/GSP solution
Elevate processes with AI automation and vendor delight
Streamline vendor management and collaboration in one unified portal
Optimise ITC for profitability
Bulk invoicing within any ERP
e-TDS return filing solution
Maximise EBITDA with early vendor payments
Instant working capital financing
Automated secretarial compliance
Connected finance ecosystem for process automation, greater control, higher savings and productivity
GST and direct tax compliance
Complete supply chain solution for ultimate control, effortless collaboration, and assured compliance
File your taxes in 3 minutes
ITR filed by India's top tax experts
G1-G9 filing ASP/GSP solution
Elevate processes with AI automation and vendor delight
Streamline vendor management and collaboration in one unified portal
Optimise ITC for profitability
Bulk invoicing within any ERP
e-TDS return filing solution
Maximise EBITDA with early vendor payments
Instant working capital financing
Automated secretarial compliance
Connected finance ecosystem for process automation, greater control, higher savings and productivity
GST and direct tax compliance
Complete supply chain solution for ultimate control, effortless collaboration, and assured compliance
File your taxes in 3 minutes
ITR filed by India's top tax experts
File your ITR in Minuteswith 100% Accuracy
Home
>
Income Tax
>
80C-80-Deductions
>
Section 80C of Income Tax Act - 80C Deduction List
Section 80C of Income Tax Act - 80C Deduction List
|
Section 80C is one of the most popular tax saving deductions, allowing both individuals and HUFs to claim up to Rs. 1.5 lakh deduction per financial year. It covers a variety of investments and payments such as PPF, ELSS, life insurance premiums, NSC, EPF, Sukanya Samriddhi Yojana and, home loan principal repayment, and tuition fees.
Key Highlights
Section 80C deduction is available only under the old tax regime.
Additional Rs. 50,000 deduction can be claimed u/s 80CCD(1B) on contribution to specified pension funds.
Parallel provisions in the Income Tax Act, 2025 are dealt undersection 123of the act.
What is Section 80C Deductions?
Section 80C is a deduction against total income, allowing you to reduce the taxable income up to a Rs. 1.5 lakhs. This means that the deduction is against income, not the final tax outlay. It offerstax savingsagainst various government backed investments, saving schemes, and other crucial payments such as tution fees, home loan repayment.
The aforesaid deduction limit applies to the cumulative investment amount, not amount contributed against each investment/payment. Irrespective of the amount of investments, the maximum limit is fixed at Rs. 1.5 lakhs.
Section 80C deduction is available only under the old regime. Taxpayers opting for the new tax regime are not eligible for this deduction.
Section 80C - Income Tax Act 2025 Updates
As mentioned in Budget 2026, the newIncome Tax Act 2025came into effect from 1st April 2026 and will be applicable forTax Year2026-27 and onwards. The Income Tax Act 2025 revamps the direct tax structure with simplified language and new sections to ensure uniformity. All deductions under Section 80C, 80CCC, and 80CCC(1) have been combined under a single Section 123 read with schedule XV.
The deductions remain to be allowed only under the old tax regime. Thus, taxpayers opting for the new tax regime will not be allowed to claim such tax deductions even under the Income Tax Act 2025.
Though the  Income Tax Act 2025 takes effect from 01st April 2026, the provisions of the 1961 act applies for AY 2026-27, as it pertains to income earned up to 31st March, 2026.
Below is the comparison of the Income Tax Act 1961 Act with those in the Income Tax Act 2026.
Section 80C Deductions List - FY 2025-26
The following investments and expenses can be claimed as Section 80C Deductions:
Life insurance premium payments
Public Provident Fund(PPF)
Employee Provident Fund (EPF) contributions
Equity Linked Savings Scheme(ELSS) mutual funds
National Savings Certificate(NSC)
Sukanya Samriddhi Yojana(SSY)
5 year tax-saving fixed deposits
Senior Citizen Savings Scheme(SCSS)
Home loan principal repayment
Stamp duty and registration charges on property purchase
Tuition fees paid for up to two children
However, a combined deduction of up to Rs. 1.5 lakh is allowed for the above investments and expenses.
Maximum Section 80C Deduction Limit - FY 2025-26
The maximum deduction available under Section 80C is Rs. 1,50,000 per financial year. This limit is applicable to the total combined amount invested across all eligible instruments and expenses.
For example, if a taxpayer invests:
Rs. 60,000 in PPF
Rs. 50,000 in ELSS
Rs. 60,000 in life insurance premiums
The total deduction allowed will be Rs. 1.5 lakh, which is the maximum allowed under Section 80C and not he actual Rs. 1.7 lakh invested.
However, you can claim an additional deduction of Rs. 50,000 under Section 80CCD(1B) for contributions made to theNational Pension Scheme(NPS). Therefore, the total maximum deduction available under Sections 80C, 80CCC, 80CCD(1), and80CCD(1B)is Rs. 2 lakh.
Popular Section 80C investment options
The following table compares the various features of section 80C deduction options, easy for taxpayers to choose the most suitable option for them.
The maximum section 80C deduction limit is Rs. 1.5 lakh per Financial Year for all the above deductions combined.
Who can claim Section 80C Deductions?
Only individuals and HUFs are eligible to claim Section 80C deductions. Companies, Firms, LLPs, etc. are not allowed to claim the Section 80C deductions.
How to Save Tax under Section 80C?
Let us understand how section 80C helps in reducing tax implications using an example.
Mr. A has a salary income of Rs. 10 lakhs and other income of Rs. 1 lakh. He has invested Rs. 1.5 lakh in PPF.
The difference in tax implications when 80C deductions are claimed and not claimed is explained below:
Therefore, by claiming a deduction of Rs. 1.5 lakh under Section 80C,Mr. A has saved Rs. 36,400 in taxesunder the old tax regime.
Use ClearTax's freeIncome Tax Calculatorto optimise tax savings and determine taxes.
How to claim Section 80C Deductions?
It is important to understand and comply with the following points to claim Section 80C deductions:
Invest in eligible instruments before 31st March of the financial year.
Collect proofs such as deposit slips, insurance premium receipts, ELSS statements, etc.
Declare investments to your employer to adjust TDS.
File ITR and report investments under “Deductions under Chapter VI-A”.
You can useClearTaxtax filing tool to help you claim deductions and ensure easy tax filing and compliance. Ourtax expertscan make your tax filing simpler.
ELSS Funds Deduction Under Section 80C
Equity Linked Savings Scheme (ELSS) is a tax saving mutual fund that invests primarily in equity. Investments in ELSS qualifies for tax deductions under Section 80C.
PPF Deduction Under Section 80C
Public Provident Fund (PPF) is a government backed savings scheme that offers tax deduction under Section 80C along with low risk long term returns.
EPF Deduction Under Section 80C
Employee Provident Fund (EPF) is a retirement savings scheme for salaried employees that qualifies for tax benefit under Section 80C.
NSC Deduction Under Section 80C
National Savings Certificate (NSC) is a government backed fixed income investment scheme that is allowed as tax deduction under Section 80C.
Sukanya Samriddhi Yojana Deduction Under Section 80C
Sukanya Samriddhi Yojana (SSY) is a government backed savings scheme specifically designed for girl children. Taxpayers with a girl child can start investing in this scheme. Investment in SSY is allowed as tax deductions under Section 80C.
SCSS Deduction Under Section 80C
Senior Citizen Savings Scheme (SCSS) is a government backed savings scheme for senior citizen taxpayers that offers tax savings deductions under Section 80C.
Old Tax Regime vs New Tax Regime: Section 80C Deduction
Section 80C deduction is optimal for taxpayers opting to file taxes under the old tax regime, as taxpayers can benefit from tax deductions of up to Rs.1.5 lakh which reduces the taxable income significantly.
However, for taxpayers opting for thenew tax regime, Section 80C deductions are not allowed. Taxpayers having made eligible investments and expenses will still not be allowed deduction under Section 80C. Therefore, it is important to plan taxes and opt for thebetter tax regimedepending on the taxpayer's income.
How to Maximise Section 80C Deductions?
Start investing early in the financial year to benefit from compounding and avoid last minute decisions or investments.
Utilise the entire Rs. 1.5 lakh limit to maximise tax deduction and savings.
Diversify across various investment schemes like Public Provident Fund (PPF), Equity Linked Savings Scheme (ELSS), and National Savings Certificate (NSC) to balance risk and returns.
Claim the additional Rs. 50,000 deduction under Section 80CCD(1B) by investing in National Pension Scheme. This can increase your total deduction limit up to Rs. 2 lakh.
Make sure all investments have been made under the taxpayer's name andrelevant documentsare available at time ofITR filing.
Frequently Asked Questions
Yes. You can still claim those investments when you file your income tax return if not submitted to your employer. Just make sure the investments were made before the end of the financial year, i.e 31st March 2026
You can claim deduction for the investments made in the ITR of that financial year. So, let's say you made an investment on April 30, 2025, you can claim it as a deduction when filing your taxes for the FY 2025-2026.
Yes, you can get a deduction under Section 80C when you pay life insurance premiums to any insurance company approved by the Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority of India, whether they are public or private.
You can go ahead claiming the stamp duty for the purchase of a house in the year in which the payment is made towards stamp duty under Section 80C.
Section 80CCD (1) allows deductions for NPS contributions at a maximum of 10% (20% for self employed) of basic salary plus dearness allowance, subject to Rs 1.5 lakh maximum limit of section 80C.
Section 80CCD(2) allows deductions for employers' contributions made to the pension scheme, maximum up to 14% (under new regime) and 10% (under old regime) of total income can be availed.
Yes. You can claim deductions under both sections 80C and 80D of the Income Tax Act, 1961.
The maximum section 80C deduction limit available to a taxpayer is Rs. 1,50,000 per financial year.
Yes, NRIs can claim Section 80C deductions for eligible instruments like Life Insurance, ELSS.
If the tenure of the FD is equal to or greater than 5 years (typically called tax saving FDs), deduction is allowed under section 80C.
Yes, tuition fees paid to a university, college, school or other educational institution in India for full-time education can be claimed as a deduction under section 80C
ULIPs can be claimed as a deduction under section 80C
Section 80CCE prescribes that the combined limit under section 80C, 80CCC and 80CCD(1) does not exceed Rs. 1.5 lakhs.
Clear offers taxation & financial solutions to individuals, businesses, organizations & chartered accountants in India. Clear serves 1.5+ Million happy customers, 20000+ CAs & tax experts & 10000+ businesses across India.
Efiling Income Tax Returns(ITR) is made easy with Clear platform. Just upload your form 16, claim your deductions and get your acknowledgment number online. You can efile income tax return on your income from salary, house property, capital gains, business & profession and income from other sources. Further you can also file TDS returns, generate Form-16, use our Tax Calculator software, claim HRA, check refund status and generate rent receipts for Income Tax Filing.
CAs, experts and businesses can get GST ready with Clear GST software & certification course. Our GST Software helps CAs, tax experts & business to manage returns & invoices in an easy manner. Our Goods & Services Tax course includes tutorial videos, guides and expert assistance to help you in mastering Goods and Services Tax. Clear can also help you in getting your business registered for Goods & Services Tax Law.
Save taxes with Clear by investing in tax saving mutual funds (ELSS) online. Our experts suggest the best funds and you can get high returns by investing directly or through SIP. Download Black by ClearTax App to file returns from your mobile phone.
Office Address - Defmacro Software Private Limited, C 245A, Ground floor, Room No 1, Vikas Puri, West Delhi, New Delhi, Delhi 110018, India
Cleartax is a product by Defmacro Software Pvt. Ltd.
Privacy PolicyTerms of use
ISO 27001
Data Center
SSL Certified Site
128-bit encryption