G1-G9 filing ASP/GSP solution
Elevate processes with AI automation and vendor delight
Streamline vendor management and collaboration in one unified portal
Optimise ITC for profitability
Bulk invoicing within any ERP
e-TDS return filing solution
Maximise EBITDA with early vendor payments
Instant working capital financing
Automated secretarial compliance
Connected finance ecosystem for process automation, greater control, higher savings and productivity
GST and direct tax compliance
Complete supply chain solution for ultimate control, effortless collaboration, and assured compliance
File your taxes in 3 minutes
ITR filed by India's top tax experts
G1-G9 filing ASP/GSP solution
Elevate processes with AI automation and vendor delight
Streamline vendor management and collaboration in one unified portal
Optimise ITC for profitability
Bulk invoicing within any ERP
e-TDS return filing solution
Maximise EBITDA with early vendor payments
Instant working capital financing
Automated secretarial compliance
Connected finance ecosystem for process automation, greater control, higher savings and productivity
GST and direct tax compliance
Complete supply chain solution for ultimate control, effortless collaboration, and assured compliance
File your taxes in 3 minutes
ITR filed by India's top tax experts
File your ITR in Minuteswith 100% Accuracy
Home
>
Income Tax
>
Salary Income
>
Standard Deduction for Salaried Individuals in New & Old Tax Regime
Standard Deduction for Salaried Individuals in New & Old Tax Regime
|
TheIncome Tax Actnot only provides provisions for imposing taxes on the income of citizens but also offers number of ways through which one can claim deductions and rebates. The deductions are allowed based on the way the taxpayers spend their income.
One such deduction offered to salaried individuals is the standard deduction. You must know that salaried individuals and pensioners can claim a certain amount under standard deduction by default without any investment or spending of money by the taxpayers. The provision was taken down for a number of years and was re-introduced during the Budget announcement in 2018.
Budget 2026 Expectations
It isexpectedthat the standard deduction under the new tax regime might be increased to Rs. 1 lakh from Rs. 75,000 to increase the disposable income and ensure tax savings.
What is Standard Deduction?
The standard deduction is a fixed amount that taxpayers can subtract from their gross income to reduce their taxable income. It is available to salaried individuals and pensioners without requiring proof or documentation.
Standard Deduction under New & Old Tax Regime
The standard deduction available for salaried individuals under both the regimes for the FY 2025-26 (AY 2026-27) is as follows:
Old Tax Regime:Rs. 50,000
New Tax Regime:Rs. 75,000
Purpose of Standard Deduction
The introduction of standard deduction aims to achieve the following:
Simplify tax filing by reducing paperwork and enabling deductions regardless of actual expenses.
Offer tax relief specifically to middle-class salaried individuals.
Extend benefits to pensioners through the standard deduction.
Benefits of Standard Deduction
The standard deduction is a fixed amount available to salaried individuals, directly reducing taxable income and, in turn, lowering their tax liability and overall tax burden.
Reduction of tax liability:The standard deduction is a flat deduction that helps in reducing the taxable income, resulting in reduction of tax liability.
Simplification of ITR filing:There is no need to maintain any documents or proofs to claim standard deduction making it easier to file the income tax return while claiming standard deduction.
No Conditions Attached:The standard deduction is available to all salaried individuals, without any conditions.
Documents Required for Standard Deduction
No supporting documents are required to claim the standard deduction for salary income. However, for filing income tax returns, you will need to provide the following documents and complete the necessary forms:
Bank statements for the relevant financial year.
Income statements from interest or fixed deposits.
TDS (Tax Deducted at Source) certificates.
Investment documents.
Form 26AS and Form AIS.
Also Read:1.Income Tax Slabs for FY 2025-26 (AY 2026-27)2.Income Tax Slab For Women FY 2025-263.How To Save Taxes Under The New Regime FY 2025-26?4.Exemption for ITR Filing for Senior Citizens
Frequently Asked Questions
ClearTax e-filing softwareautomatically considers the deduction amount while e-filing if you are a salaried person.
No, you cannot claim a deduction of Rs. 50,000 for the years prior to 2019-20 as the limit then was Rs 40,000.
No, you can claim only the standard deduction and not the transport and medical allowance.
No, Standard deduction is applicable only for individuals having income from Salary. Since Freelancing is considered as income from business and profession same is not eligible for the standard deduction.
Only those individuals having income from Salary can claim the standard deduction.
Yes , standard deduction is available under the new regime as well.
The standard deduction for FY 2025-26 is Rs. 50,000 under the old regime and Rs. 75,000 under the new regime.
Yes, Standard Deduction has been increased from Rs.50,000 to Rs.75,000 only for tax payers opting fornew tax regime.This increase is applicable from FY 2024-25.
Union budget 2024 has proposed an increase in the standard deduction under thenew tax regimefor the FY 2025-26 to Rs. 75,000.
An increased standard deduction of Rs. 75,000 is not applicable under the Old tax regime. However standard deduction of Rs. 75,000 is applicable under the new tax regime for the FY 2025-26.
The standard deduction is available as a flat deduction from the total salary earned by the employee in a particular financial year. It does not depend on the number of jobs changed by the employee. Hence one flat deduction is available for the cumulative salary earned from all the employers.
Yes, if a taxpayer has received a pension from the former employer, it is taxable under the head ‘Income from Salaries’, and since standard deduction is available against salary income, it is allowed against pension as well.
Clear offers taxation & financial solutions to individuals, businesses, organizations & chartered accountants in India. Clear serves 1.5+ Million happy customers, 20000+ CAs & tax experts & 10000+ businesses across India.
Efiling Income Tax Returns(ITR) is made easy with Clear platform. Just upload your form 16, claim your deductions and get your acknowledgment number online. You can efile income tax return on your income from salary, house property, capital gains, business & profession and income from other sources. Further you can also file TDS returns, generate Form-16, use our Tax Calculator software, claim HRA, check refund status and generate rent receipts for Income Tax Filing.
CAs, experts and businesses can get GST ready with Clear GST software & certification course. Our GST Software helps CAs, tax experts & business to manage returns & invoices in an easy manner. Our Goods & Services Tax course includes tutorial videos, guides and expert assistance to help you in mastering Goods and Services Tax. Clear can also help you in getting your business registered for Goods & Services Tax Law.
Save taxes with Clear by investing in tax saving mutual funds (ELSS) online. Our experts suggest the best funds and you can get high returns by investing directly or through SIP. Download Black by ClearTax App to file returns from your mobile phone.
Office Address - Defmacro Software Private Limited, C 245A, Ground floor, Room No 1, Vikas Puri, West Delhi, New Delhi, Delhi 110018, India
Cleartax is a product by Defmacro Software Pvt. Ltd.
Privacy PolicyTerms of use
ISO 27001
Data Center
SSL Certified Site
128-bit encryption