G1-G9 filing ASP/GSP solution
Elevate processes with AI automation and vendor delight
Streamline vendor management and collaboration in one unified portal
Optimise ITC for profitability
Bulk invoicing within any ERP
e-TDS return filing solution
Maximise EBITDA with early vendor payments
Instant working capital financing
Automated secretarial compliance
Connected finance ecosystem for process automation, greater control, higher savings and productivity
GST and direct tax compliance
Complete supply chain solution for ultimate control, effortless collaboration, and assured compliance
File your taxes in 3 minutes
ITR filed by India's top tax experts
G1-G9 filing ASP/GSP solution
Elevate processes with AI automation and vendor delight
Streamline vendor management and collaboration in one unified portal
Optimise ITC for profitability
Bulk invoicing within any ERP
e-TDS return filing solution
Maximise EBITDA with early vendor payments
Instant working capital financing
Automated secretarial compliance
Connected finance ecosystem for process automation, greater control, higher savings and productivity
GST and direct tax compliance
Complete supply chain solution for ultimate control, effortless collaboration, and assured compliance
File your taxes in 3 minutes
ITR filed by India's top tax experts
File your ITR in Minuteswith 100% Accuracy
Home
>
Income Tax
>
Old vs New Tax Regime For FY 2025-26: Which Regime is Better for you?
Old vs New Tax Regime For FY 2025-26: Which Regime is Better for you?
|
The old tax regime offers taxpayers with a wide range of exemptions & deductions to claim, however, the new tax regime disallows most of these deduction while still offering relaxed income tax slab rates. The question of which tax regime is better depends on the taxpayer's income, exemptions & deductions limit, and the final tax savings that a taxpayer makes.
Key Highlights of the Old & New Tax Regime
The old tax regime offers various exemptions & deductions such as HRA, 80C, 80D etc. which are disallowed in the new tax regime.
Old v/s New Tax Regime - Income Tax Slabs
1. New Regime Income Tax Slabs FY 2025-26 (AY 2026-27)
Theincome tax slabrates under the new tax regime applicable for FY 2025-2026 are as follows:
2. Old Regime Income Tax Slabs FY 2025-26 (AY 2026-27)
The following slab rates are applicable for individuals aged below 60 years and non-residents opting for old tax regime.
The old tax regime offers higher basic exemption limits forsenior & super senior citizensas follows:
For taxpayers aged between 60 to 80 years, the basic exemption limit is Rs. 3 lakh.
For taxpayers aged above 80 years, the basic exemption limit is Rs. 5 lakh.
Old v/s New Tax Regime Calculator
Use ClearTax's income tax calculator and compare which tax regime is better for you!
Enter your annual salary
Recommended
Recommended
Calculate Now
Old v/s New Tax Regime - Deductions and Exemptions
The old tax regime provides various deductions and exemptions to taxpayers to lower their taxable income. However, most of these are not allwed under the new tax regime.
1. Tax Rebate
Rebate underSection 87Ais allowed under both the tax regimes. The old tax regime offers a tax rebate of up to Rs. 12,500 whereas the new tax regime offers a tax rebate of up to Rs. 60,000. Thus making incomes up to Rs 5 lakh and Rs. 12 lakh effectively tax-free under old and new tax regime respectively.
2. Standard Deduction
For salaried individuals, both tax regimes offer a standard deduction against the salary income. The standard deductions are as follows:
Old Tax Regime:Rs. 50,000
New Tax Regime:Rs. 75,000
The new tax regime offers a significantly higher standard deduction.
3. House Rent Allowance
HRA is a deduction that every salary individual get and can benefit from if the opt for the old tax regime. But the HRA deduction is disallowed under the new tax regime
Calculate your HRA exemption limit using ClearTaxHRA Calculator.
4. Home Loan Interest
Taxpayers repaying home loans can benefit from a tax deduction against thehome loan interest paid. A deduction of up to Rs. 2 lakh is allowed against self-occupied property under old tax regime.
Taxpayers can claim home loan interest deduction against income from let-out property without any limit under both old and new tax regime. However, under the new regime, the tax benefit on interest is limited to the taxable rent, since the house property loss under the new regime has no carry forward benefit.
5. Chapter VI-A Deductions
The following deductions are allowed underChapter VI-Aof the Income Tax Act 1961:
Basis of Differentiation
Old Tax Regime
New Tax Regime
Investment deductions u/s 80C
Up to Rs. 1.5 lakhs can be claimed as a deduction.
Popular investments are life insurance policy, ELSS, 5 years fixed deposits, etc.
Not Allowed
Employer's Contribution to National Pension System (NPS)  -Section 80CCD(2)
Up to 10% of basic pay allowed
Up to 14% of basic pay allowed
Employee's contribution to Pension Fund (NPS) - Section 80CCD(1)
Allowed up to Rs. 1.5 lakh limit
Not Allowed
Medical insurance premium undersection 80D
Up to Rs. 25,000 for self and family.
Up to Rs. 25,000 for senior citizens.
Up to Rs. 50,000 for senior citizens
Not Allowed
Education loan deduction undersection 80E
Allowed entirely
Not Allowed
Section 80U- Disability
Up to Rs. 1.25 lakhs deduction available
Not Allowed
Donations to charitable institutions undersection 80G
Allowed
Not Allowed
Donations to political parties u/s80GGC
Allowed entirely
Not Allowed
All contributions to Agniveer Corpus Fund - 80CCH
Allowed
Allowed
6. Retirement Benefits
The following retirement benefit exemptions are available to salaried taxpayers:
Exemption on voluntary retirement 10(10C)
Exemption on gratuity u/s 10(10)
Exemption on Leave encashment u/s 10(10AA)
7. Other Deductions
The other deductions are as follows:
Leave Travel Allowance (LTA)
Entertainment Allowance and Professional Tax
Perquisites for official purposes
Deduction on Family Pension Income
Max deduction of Rs. 15,000
Max deduction of Rs. 25,000
Gifts received up to Rs 50,000
Daily Allowance
Conveyance Allowance
Transport Allowance for a specially-abled person
New Tax Regime vs Old Tax Regime FY 2025-26 - Which Is Better?
Choosing between the Old and New Tax Regimes depends on your income level, deductions, and exemptions.
For salaried individuals with minimal deductions, the New Regime is likely more beneficial due to relaxed tax slabs and a rebate up to Rs. 12 lakh income. However, if you claim substantial deductions under Sections 80C, 80D, HRA, or home loan interest, the Old Regime may offer greater tax savings.
Use ClearTaxIncome Tax Calculatorto know which tax regime is better for you!
Let us understand the most beneficial regime using the following examples:
Example-1
Mr. A, has a salary income of Rs. 10 lakhs.
Section 80C for Rs.1 lakhs and
Medical insurance premium Rs. 30,000
The computation of taxable income and total tax payable under both the regimes is tabulated below:
New regime proved to be beneficial, wholly attributable to increased rebate.
Example-2
Mr. A, has a salary income of Rs. 20 lakhs. He has investment deductions as follows:
Investment deductions under section 80C - Rs.1 lakh
Medical insurance premium paid of Rs. 30,000 for his self and family.
Interest on home loan (self occupied property) - Rs. 2,00,000
Donation to political party - Rs. 2,75,000
The computation of taxable income and total tax payable under both the regimes is as below:
In the current example, the new tax regime proved to be more beneficial in spite of to high tax saving deductions, because of the relaxed slab rates.
The Learning:Only a lot of tax saving deductions would make the old regime more beneficial
Breakeven Deductions When Old Tax Regime Will Be Better?
The following table summarises the level of deduction required where the old tax regime will be more benficial. If the taxpayer has total deductions & exemptions exceeding the amount mentioned against their income level, the old tax regime would be beneficial than the new tax regime.
Note:
Deduction amount more than the amount specified on column 2 is required to make the old regime the most beneficial. If the deduction amount is less than what is shown in column 2, new regime is the most beneficial.
The income level here denotes the income net of standard deduction.
Income given here does not include any special tax income.
Which Tax Regime is Better for Investors?
Equity investors pay capital gains tax when they transfer their shares. Thecapital gainstax under both the regime is the same. However, investing in certain tax saving schemes is allowed as deductions under the old tax regime.
Which Tax Regime is Better for NRIs?
Most of the tax saving deductions are available for NRIs also, except a few deductions like section 80TTB. Therefore even though you are an NRI, you can avail the tax saving deductions under the old regime. The choice of the most beneficial regime depends on your income and deduction level, similar to residents.
Conclusion
The new tax regime benefits individuals with minimal deductions or those who prefer a simpler filing process. On the other hand, the old tax regime is ideal for those who can claim significant deductions and exemptions. Senior citizens, in particular, may benefit more under the old regime throughSection 80TTB, which allows a ₹50,000 deduction on interest income.
Also Read -Income-tax Rules 2026
Frequently Asked Questions
The old tax regime is the existing tax structure under which taxpayers can claim various deductions and exemptions under different sections of the Income Tax Act. It has a higher tax rate but allows taxpayers to claim tax benefits on various investments and expenses.
The new tax regime has lower tax rates than the old regime but eliminates the tax benefits of various investments and expenses.
Yes, you can switch between the old and new tax regimes every year at the time of filing their tax returns. However, once you opt for the new tax regime for a year, you cannot claim any tax benefits available in the old tax regime. If you have business income, you can shift from new to old regime, but you have only one time option to shift back to new regime.
If you have an income of Rs 7 lakhs, the new tax regime will benefit you.
For FY 2025-26, for a salary income of Rs. 10 lakh, then the new tax regime will be beneficial as income upto Rs. 12 lakh is tax-free due to rebate u/s 87A.
For FY 2025-26, if your salary is Rs. 12.5 lakh per annum then opting for the new tax regime would be beneficial as a standard deduction of Rs. 75,000 will be available to you and you will be eligible for Rebate u/s 87A as your taxable income will be less than Rs. 12 lakh after standard deduction.
If your tax saving deductions are greater than Rs. 5,44,000, then the old regime is more beneficial for you.
If your tax saving investments are more than Rs. 7,08,500, then the old regime is beneficial for you at an income level of Rs 20 lakhs.
For any income range more than Rs 25 lakhs, the old regime would be more beneficial if the tax saving deductions are more than Rs 8 lakhs.
Under the new tax regime for FY 2025-26, taxpayers can claim limited deductions such as standard deduction of ₹75,000, interest on home loan under section 24(b) for let-out property and employer’s contribution to NPS under section 80CCD(2),etc.
Clear offers taxation & financial solutions to individuals, businesses, organizations & chartered accountants in India. Clear serves 1.5+ Million happy customers, 20000+ CAs & tax experts & 10000+ businesses across India.
Efiling Income Tax Returns(ITR) is made easy with Clear platform. Just upload your form 16, claim your deductions and get your acknowledgment number online. You can efile income tax return on your income from salary, house property, capital gains, business & profession and income from other sources. Further you can also file TDS returns, generate Form-16, use our Tax Calculator software, claim HRA, check refund status and generate rent receipts for Income Tax Filing.
CAs, experts and businesses can get GST ready with Clear GST software & certification course. Our GST Software helps CAs, tax experts & business to manage returns & invoices in an easy manner. Our Goods & Services Tax course includes tutorial videos, guides and expert assistance to help you in mastering Goods and Services Tax. Clear can also help you in getting your business registered for Goods & Services Tax Law.
Save taxes with Clear by investing in tax saving mutual funds (ELSS) online. Our experts suggest the best funds and you can get high returns by investing directly or through SIP. Download Black by ClearTax App to file returns from your mobile phone.
Office Address - Defmacro Software Private Limited, C 245A, Ground floor, Room No 1, Vikas Puri, West Delhi, New Delhi, Delhi 110018, India
Cleartax is a product by Defmacro Software Pvt. Ltd.
Privacy PolicyTerms of use
ISO 27001
Data Center
SSL Certified Site
128-bit encryption